There was once a community of frogs living in a well near the Atlantic Ocean. None of them had ever been out of the well, so they knew nothing of the outside world.

Then one day a particularly athletic young frog managed to leap out of the well. He began to explore. When he came to the beach and saw the ocean, he was astonished. He’d never seen anything like it, and he rushed back to the well to report his discovery.

Back in the well, the young frog excitedly asked to see the most learned frog in the community. This senior frog knew all there was to know about the sociology, history, and geography of the world-in-a-well. He was a veritable repository of froggish knowledge. Let’s call him Dr. Frog.

“Where have you been?” asked Dr. Frog of the young explorer. “What did you see?”

“I saw a vast body of water,” replied the young frog.

“How vast? Was it twice the size of our well?” And Dr. Frog puffed himself up a little in appreciation of such a huge body of water.

“No, no, sir. It’s much larger than that. You see—”

“Was it four times the size of our well?” Dr. Frog puffed himself up some more.

“No, no, sir. Much, much larger.”

“Ten times the size of our well?” Dr. Frog puffed prodigiously.

“No, no, you don’t understand.” And with that Dr. Frog puffed himself up a little more—and burst.

* * *

His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada, the founder and spiritual guide of the Hare Krsna movement, would sometimes tell this story to illustrate the limitations of the scientific method when applied to ultimate questions such as the origin of the universe or the existence and nature of God.

And scientists themselves admit these limitations. In 1980, Kenneth E. Boulding, president of the American Association for the Advancement of Science, said this during an address to the organization’s annual convention: “Cosmology . . . is likely to be very insecure, simply because it studies a very large universe with a very small and biased sample. We have only been looking at it carefully for a very small fraction of its total time span, and we know intimately an even smaller fraction of its total span in space.”

Srila Prabhupada’s criticism of material knowledge echoes that found in the Vedic literature, India’s large body of philosophical writings. Thousands of years ago the Vedic sages analyzed the reasons why knowledge acquired through the material senses and mind is defective. First of all, the senses themselves are limited and imperfect. Second, we easily become illusioned. Third, we make mistakes. And fourth, we have a tendency to cheat, to claim possession of the truth when the foundations of our knowledge are shaky.

Let’s take a closer look at these impediments to materially acquired knowledge.

Imperfect Senses

The first problem we face when trying to get accurate information about the external world is that our senses have physiological limits, or “thresholds of perception.” Take the eyes, for example. We can see only a tiny fraction of the total electromagnetic spectrum. An electromagnetic wave can range from one quadril-lionth of a meter up to 100 million meters in length. And of this immense array of energy, we can see only the waves between 400 and 750 millimicrons long. (A millimicron is a billionth of a meter.) Violet falls around the 400 millimicron range, blue around 450, green around 500, yellow around 600, and red around 700. Anything outside this thin band is invisible to us.

Our hearing is limited in the same way. Sound waves are measured in hertz, or cycles per second. Human hearing extends from 20 hertz up to 20,000 hertz. We’re deaf to any vibration above or below this range.

If we examine each of our remaining senses, we’ll find them similarly limited.

So our senses are imperfect. But what of scientific instruments? Can’t they help us get more perfect knowledge? Not really. They merely complicate things. Nobel-Prize-winning physicist Eugene Wigner points out, “Even if we photograph the stars, we must eventually ‘take in’ by our senses what the photograph shows. Furthermore, without our senses, we could not handle a photographic camera. Clearly, all knowledge comes to us ultimately through our senses.”

So even if amplified or refined by instruments, whatever knowledge we base on sense perception is no more perfect than our imperfect senses.